{:title "Clojure CLI Tools in Debian - GSoC 2021 Final Report"
 :layout :post
 :tags  ["debian", "gsoc", "clojure"]}


**NOTE**: this blog post is based on [my "Clojure CLI Tools in Debian" GSoC 2021 project Final Report](https://lists.debian.org/debian-clojure/2021/08/msg00028.html).


# Intro

My name is Leandro Doctors (“allentiak” on IRC), and I’ve been the GSoC
intern working with the Debian Clojure Team during 2021. This is my
final report. You can also check [my original
proposal](https://salsa.debian.org/allentiak/gsoc-2021-proposal-feedback/-/blob/main/full.proposal--debian--2021--clojure-cli--leandro.doctors.pdf)
and [my first
report](https://lists.debian.org/debian-clojure/2021/07/msg00000.html).

# Summary

Whereas the raw data may not sound by itself very positive, my personal
conclusion is. This is, whereas I didn’t fully finish the required
deliverables envisioned in my original proposal, I do feel I am much
closer to, eventually, becoming a Debian Developer. So, by all means, I
consider this project has had a positive outcome.

<!--more-->

# Project

The goal of the “Clojure Build Tools in Debian” project was to provide
Clojure Debian users with some of the latest advanced build tools and
libraries the upstream Clojure developers have been lately working on.
These include `tools.deps.alpha`, a library for dependency graph
resolution and classpath building, and the CLI tool `clj`, for REPL
interaction. If time permitted, I was also to improve the quality of
both new and existing Clojure packages, and the overall Debian Clojure
packaging process. My mentor was Louis-Louis-Philippe Véronneau, and my
co-mentor was Utkarsh Gupta.

# Motivation

Why this project? On the one side, if you’re a Clojure lover like me,
you may have noticed that the Clojure experience in Debian is, as of mid
2021, well... still quiet limited. Additionally, this project aligned
with my own background in Free Software community building and my
research interest in Peer Production.

When I mention how limited today’s Clojure experience in Debian is, I
can see two reasons for this, deeply intertwined. The first one is that
there currently aren’t many Clojure-specific packaging tools in Debian
(such as a `clojure-debian-helper`). The second reason for which we only
currently have a suboptimal Clojure experience in Debian, and probably
the root of the previous one, is that many core build tools and
libraries for the language have not simply been packaged yet. My project
aimed to attack that seemingly root cause.

As I said, another reason for me choosing this project is my own
experience as the Co-founder and Leader of, probably, the first Free
Software Community experience in my hometown of San Juan, Argentina.
That interest in Free Software evolved in a first PhD attempt in what is
now known as the field of Peer Production. A subject that has lived
within me as a research interest during my day job at a University.

Being a Clojure fan, it felt only logical combining all those interests
somehow. And this project seemed like the ideal combination.

# The Debian Clojure Team

I’ve been working with a small, yet very warm team. The current
incarnation of the Debian Clojure Team exists thanks to the hard work of
three people.

Elana Hashman (aka “the Clojure necromancer”), revived the team around
three years ago. Later on, the team gained the invaluable presence of
Louis-Philippe Véronneau and Utkarsh Gupta (my mentor and co-mentor,
respectively).

Together, these “Three Musketeers” have maintained the team alive,
allowing us, Debian users, to enjoy Clojure.

# Status

During the first part of my project, I mainly worked on learning the
basics of Debian packaging, and got my first package uploaded. I have to
thank Louis-Philippe, Utkarsh, and Elana for their immense patience and
support during that part, as it took me quite some effort grasping the
basics of Debian packaging.

During the second part of my project, I worked on my last packages, and
almost completed the originally required scope of the project. I only
have to finish working on the transition from the currently provided set
of packages (based on a Debian-specific clojure runner) to the newly
provided upstream clojure and clj runners.

Unfortunately, I didn’t have much time left to start working on the
opportunities for improvement already identified by the Debian Clojure
Team originally outlined in my proposal. Whereas I did update one older
Clojure package not built using leiningen (tools-data-xml-clojure), I
didn’t write any Lintian tags to make Clojure packaging in Debian more
robust, nor worked towards the automation of Clojure unit tests in
autopkgtests via autodep8.

## Deliverables: Data vs. Conclusions

If we are to talk about deliverables, we should start with the data.
According to my original proposal, I was required to provide both new
and updated Clojure packages accepted into Debian “unstable”, and
updated Clojure packaging documentation. Additionally, if time
permitted, I was to also provide new Clojure Lintian tags merged by the
Lintian maintainers, and new Clojure autodep8 scripts merged by the
autodep8 maintainers. Whereas I partially accomplished both required
tasks, I didn’t manage to start working on any of the optional
deliverables.

When looked in isolation, those numbers may look somewhat disappointing
for some people. However, I can draw a much more positive conclusion.
Why?

Firstly, GSoC is supposed to be a learning experience. Moreover, as I
said in my original proposal, “I
approach<span>\[</span>ed<span>\]</span> this project as a great
opportunity to, finally, start my journey towards becoming a Debian
Developer”. In that sense, I consider the time invested into this
project fruitful. In this way, I have learned the basics of packaging,
how to interact with the Debian Clojure Team, and and already got my
first packages accepted. Plus, I’m looking forward to continuing to work
with the Debian Clojure Team so I can attain the original scope of the
project. Therefore, all things considered, I can consider this
experience as a moderate success.

# Lessons Learned

Technically speaking, if I have learned one thing during these weeks, is
that packaging, although easy to be underestimated, is by no means a
trivial process. As any Debian Developer surely knows, the onboarding
process can take some time. Plus, what is easy for some people, can be
difficult for others. In my case, this was quite evident. Whereas I can
speak several languages and learning new ones takes me little effort,
grasping the basics of packaging took me (literally\!) blood, sweat and
tears. Indeed, the packaging learning curve was quite steep for me.

That being said, I did learn a thing or two about packaging. So, if I
managed to get here, I’m sure many others can. It may take them more or
less time than what it took me, but learning (at least the basics) of
packaging is an achievable goal.

Technical skill learning aside, I value very highly the non-technical
skills I have so far improved during this project.

For instance, I also learned that it can take some time to adapt to
real-time online communication. Before this project, remote working
meant either exchanging emails or getting into video or audio calls,
with a low emphasis on chat-based interaction. Early on, I realized that
the Debian Clojure Team interacts almost exclusively via, well... chat\!
And those two approaches are very different indeed. It has taken me some
time to adjust, but I’ve improved greatly in this aspect as well.

Finally, improving my time management skills has been also a key part of
this process. Whereas I had already been working remotely for over a
year and a half already, my day job is not so interaction-dependent as
this project (specially in the beginning). So it took me some time to
adapt to this way of working, and to plan my workload so I could use
those waiting moments to advance in other parts of the project. Still a
lot to improve here, but improving nevertheless.

# Acknowledgments

I first have to thank upstream. More specifically, one of the upstream
developers of the clojure-tools, Alex Miller. Everytime I needed
specific information on what do specific parts of the Clojure CLI
tools’s codebase do, tools.deps.alpha do, he popped up a reply in a
matter of hours. He has shown genuine interest in the success of is
project during by carefully replying to my emails with detailed
explanations of code intent and form, both in private and in public
conversations. Thank you for all that, Alex\!

Let’s move on to the Debian Clojure Team.

First, Elana. I thank Elana for her initial openness when I first
contacted her about this idea. It was <span>\*</span>her<span>\*</span>
who initially contacted Louis-Philippe so he would become my mentor. I
wouldn’t have started to work on this project if it wasn’t for her.
Plus, she provided quite a piece of advise in more that one ocassion.
So, thank you very much for all that, Elana\!

I also thank Utkarsh, my co-mentor, for his overall technical advise.
And a special mention to his initial help to setup my Matrix client for
OFTC chat. At that moment, it was <span>\*</span>him<span>\*</span> who
took the time to help me in real time so I could solve that problem. So,
thank you very much for all that, Utkarsh\!

I finally have to thank Louis-Philippe, my mentor, for his patient
guidance during the whole process. His dedication and hard work has been
<span>\*</span>instrumental<span>\*</span> for my progress. And a
special mention for his tolerance with respect to some unforeseen
personal circumstances I had to endure during the first weeks. When one
is playing the newbie, times abound when one depends on other people’s
feedback. And Debian is made of volunteers, who have a life outside it.
Every time I asked, Louis-Philippe was there. I wouldn’t have gotten
here if it wasn’t for him. So, thank you
<span>\*</span>so<span>\*</span> much for all that, Louis-Philippe\!

# Final Words

I would like to close this report with a reflection.

I have been using Debian for many, many years now, and I had been
looking for a way to contribute back to the project for some time
already. I even did some work on a non-packaging Debian project. That
being said, I never managed to deliver much, really.

So, the very existence of outreach programs as this one is, in my humble
opinion, crucial. In my case, the funding I got through the GSoC program
was instrumental in being able to allocate time for this endeavor, and
to finally get started contributing to Debian. Plus, it has had a very
positive impact on me; in many ways, some of which I am only starting to
discover now that the project is ending.

When I put things into perspective, this project is very important for
me. Actually, it is nothing but the first step within a long-term
journey: becoming a Debian member. Hopefully, I would like to be able to
apply for Debian membership by the end of this year.

# Questions?

Thank you very much for your time reading this\! I look forward to
hearing (or reading) your feedback. Please come and meet with the Debian
Clojure Team Moreover, I will be in the Clojure BoF on DebConf2021.
Moreover, do not hesitate to send me an email.

# Data

## Task Status

  - Required Tasks:

      - T1: Setting up a full Debian packaging development environment
        and learning the basics of Debian packaging.

          - Successfully completed the first part during the Application
            period.

          - Successfully completed the second part during the Coding
            periods.

      - T2: Identifying and packaging the missing dependencies to
        package `clojure-cli`.

          - Successfully completed as of the end of Coding II.

      - T3: Packaging `clojure-cli`.

          - 90% done as of the end of Coding II.
    
      - T4: Updating `clojure` to use `clojure-cli`.

          - To be completed after GSoC.

      - T5: Updating the Clojure Packaging Guide with information on how
        to use the new `clojure-cli` scripts.

          - Improved existing documentation. To be completed after GSoC.

  - Optional Tasks:

      - T6: Writing Lintian tags to make Clojure packaging in Debian
        more robust.

          - To be completed after GSoC.

      - T7: Working to automate Clojure unit testing in autopkgtests
        using autodep8.

          - To be completed after GSoC.

      - T8: Updating older Clojure packages not built using leiningen or
        clojure-cli.

          - To be completed after GSoC.

## Packages

1.  Updated packages:

      - tools-data-xml-clojure
        <https://tracker.debian.org/news/1244465/accepted-data-xml-clojure-020alpha6-1-source-into-experimental/>
        Stuck in experimental until the latest version of Leiningen is
        packaged.

2.  New packages:

      - tools-gitlibs-clojure -- Clojure API for programatically
        accessing git libraries. [ITP:
        \#905543](https://bugs.debian.org/905543) [in
        NEW](https://ftp-master.debian.org/new/tools-gitlibs-clojure_2.3.167-1.html).

      - “ITP: tools-deps-alpha-clojure -- functional API for dependency
        management and classpath creation”
        <https://bugs.debian.org/891136> Needs to be uploaded by
        Louis-Philippe.

3.  In-Progress packages:

      - “ITP: clojure-cli -- upstream CLI entrypoints for Clojure”
        <https://bugs.debian.org/891141> 90% done - Package completed.
        I only need to finish implementing the transition from existing
        ‘clojure‘ scripts. To be completed after GSoC.

4.  Opened ITPs:

      - “ITP: libtools-build-clojure -- a library for building
        artifacts” <https://bugs.debian.org/992737>

          - To be completed after GSoC.

5.  Reported bugs
    
      - “libcore-specs-alpha-clojure: should provide (symlinks to) .jars
        in /usr/share/java” <https://bugs.debian.org/992735>

      - “libspec-alpha-clojure: should provide (symlinks to) .jars in
        /usr/share/java” <https://bugs.debian.org/992736>

## Other

1.  Interactions with upstream in [the Debian-Clojure mailing
    list](https://lists.debian.org/debian-clojure/):

      - Many productive interactions with one of the upstream
        developers, Alex Miller
        ([June](https://lists.debian.org/debian-clojure/2021/06/threads.html#00012),
        [August](https://lists.debian.org/debian-clojure/2021/08/threads.html)).

2.  Wiki page:

    1.  <https://wiki.debian.org/Clojure/Goals/ClojureCLIToolsInDebian>
